we will head to downing street here's
the chancellor for more on the budget of
commons
and i'm speaking to you now directly to
explain what this budget means for our
economy
and for you at home i want to be honest
with you
about the problems we face and our plan
to fix them this time last year
we all began a collective national
effort
to constrain coronavirus shield the
vulnerable
and protect jobs and businesses
since then the government has announced
more than 280 billion pounds
to protect people's lives and
livelihoods
our plan is working
the independent office for budget
responsibility
has today shown that because of
interventions like the furlough
the economy is now expected to recover
more
quickly and fewer jobs will be lost
but we still face significant challenges
people are being told to stay at home
businesses are still closed
it's going to take us a long time to
fully recover
from the damage coronavirus has done to
our economy
today's budget is a three-part plan
to protect the jobs and livelihoods of
the british people
the first part is this we're going to
keep
economic support in place until well
past the point that we exit lockdown
the furlough scheme support for the
self-employed
business grants business rates holidays
tax cuts
and the temporary universal credit
uplift have
all been extended and generously
taken together this year and next
we're spending 407 billion pounds
to support people and businesses through
coronavirus
i said whatever it takes
and that means for however long it takes
but that unprecedented level of support
combined with the damage coronavirus has
done places huge strain
on our public finances simply put
we have to get borrowing and debt back
under control so the second part
of today's budget begins fixing that
now some people think we should ignore
this problem
or worse there are some who think there
is no problem at all
but i think that's wrong if we don't act
once the economy has recovered to
control our borrowing
we won't be able to fund the stronger
public services people want to see
and when the next crisis comes along we
won't be able to respond
with the boldness we have this time
so i want to be honest with you now
today
about how we'll begin fixing the public
finances
the choice i've made is as much as i can
to protect working people small
businesses
and public services and so
while i have chosen to freeze personal
tax thresholds
some of the most generous in the world i
am not going to increase
the rates of income tax national
insurance
or vat and i am not going to find the
money that we need
by taking it from public services like
schools
or the nhs freezing tax thresholds
is fair asking more of those
on higher incomes and we're going to ask
large businesses who have made a profit
to contribute as well two years from now
well past our recovery in 2023
corporation tax on company profits
will increase to 25
the united kingdom will still have a
lower corporate tax rate
than the united states japan canada
france italy and germany
and we're protecting small businesses by
keeping their corporation tax
at the current rate of 19
this means 7 in 10 businesses
will see no tax increase at all
only the largest most successful
companies
will pay the new higher rate and they
can now plan
with certainty
i know the british people don't like tax
rises
nor do i but i also know
they dislike dishonesty even more
that's why i've been honest with you
about the problem we have
and our plan to fix it
so right now we're going long extending
our support for people and businesses
well beyond the end of lockdown and
while it is important
to control borrowing and debt those
measures
only take effect after the economy has
recovered
but today's budget is not just about
fixing problems
today's budget is also about laying the
foundations
of our future economy we're building our
future economy
by doing things that haven't been done
before and doing them for
everyone everywhere our success with the
vaccine
has shown us this country can be a
scientific
superpower leading the world through the
coming technological and scientific
revolutions towards a future
where growth and jobs go hand in hand
with tackling climate change
where we are known around the world as
the best place to invest
and do business and where we redraw the
economic map
with decent jobs in every corner of our
country
to do that this budget is helping people
develop new skills start an
apprenticeship
and get better paid jobs this budget is
helping small business owners
get the training skills and technology
they need to compete with bigger firms
and become the high growth companies of
the future
and this budget is bringing prosperity
to the whole
united kingdom with new free ports
around the country
and the largest pro-investment tax cut
in modern british history making the
time to invest right now
and the place to invest right here
so that is our budget our plan
our numbers but the number that in so
many ways
defines the last 12 months is not
included
in today's budget document
i want to finish my remarks by
acknowledging all those
who have lost their lives to coronavirus
to the family and friends left behind
your loss felt most acutely in the
quietest of moments
must be overwhelming
but i promise you we will meet this
moment
with the passion and energy it demands
and we will build a fairer and more just
country in their memory
our recovery begins today
thank you i think we have some questions
from
both public and journalists so maybe we
could turn to the first
question chancellor how will the new
budget ensure that leaseholders aren't
burdened with
unfair costs associated with cladding
and other historical building defects
robbie hi thank you for your question
now
with regard to i wonder if you're
particularly impacted by this in which
case if you are i'm sorry because i know
this has been
enormously frustrating and worrying for
people and what we did
is take action a little while ago and
made some announcements
to help people who are dealing with
unsafe cladding
in their buildings i became chancellor a
year ago in the first budget last year i
announced an extra billion pounds
and a few weeks ago the government
announced an additional three and a half
billion pounds bringing the
total that we will spend to five billion
pounds
to help remediate unsafe cladding from
buildings over 18 meters
which are the most unsafe and that work
is already underway
and we're getting on with that at pace
we also know there are people in other
buildings
who might also want to have remediation
work done so what we're doing there for
those smaller buildings
is providing a government-backed loan
scheme which will provide
low-cost government-backed loans to
people which will be capped at no more
than 50 pounds
a month so that will help provide funds
to deal with those buildings
and also we know that there have been
some problems with the mortgage market
and people asking for particular forms
so we're working very hard the housing
secretary the prime minister and i
with mortgage lenders and the industry
to make sure that the use of those forms
they're called ews one forms
that have been causing the issue the use
of those forms is going to be
proportionate and we really hope that
will help unblock the market
together with a government insurance
scheme that we're providing
for people who do those assessments so i
think the combination of five billion
pounds of funding to remedy to remediate
the most
unsafe buildings a cheap government loan
to help with the rest
and these interactions interventions on
the mortgage market when you put them
all together
hopefully they will make an enormous
difference and provide reassurance to
people
through what i know has been a difficult
process
so next if we could go please
yes uh hello chancellor sizal islam hi
um chancellor what would you say to the
i think it's million
also people that will enter the income
tax system the million or so people that
will
end up uh in the higher rate
and when you put that together with the
uh
rise in corporation tax this is a
turning round of
conservative principles has the pandemic
fundamentally changed the conservative
approach to
big business big borrowing big taxation
and big spending
thanks faisal well hopefully both in the
remarks i made
earlier now and in the house of commons
earlier people will have understood the
logic what we're trying to do
now obviously the the pandemic has dealt
us uh
pretty bad damage to the public finances
in the economy and i think
i and the government have a
responsibility to put those on back in a
strong position over time but do that in
a way
that is supportive of our economic
recovery in the short term
but also do so in a way that is fair and
i think both of the measures that we've
implemented the ones that you mentioned
pass that test for example that the
threshold freeze
means that those on the lowest incomes
contribute much less than those on
higher incomes
and it's something that only builds over
time so it's very supportive of our
recovery
and importantly nobody's current
take-home pay
will be affected as a result of this
policy
what this policy does is mean that in
the future
any benefit that might have come from
thresholds rising with inflation
will not be there and that's what will
help us rebuild our public finances in a
fair
and honest way and i know that's been
supported by several think tanks and
others who have said that's a sensible
thing to do
and with grant a corporation tax we
remain a party that believes in a
government that believes in supporting
business
and which is why our corporation tax
even after this change
will still be the lowest out of the g7
large economies that we
compete with so i think that's something
that we will be proud to do and make
sure that we support business in that
way but also crucially
we will be exempting the vast majority
of businesses our small and medium-sized
businesses
from that increase because we want those
with the bigger shoulders just the
largest most profitable country at
companies
to make the contribution in two years
time and also
there are lots of other things in
today's budget which is supportive of
business
whether that's short-term support with
business rates
holidays vat cuts cash grants
but also new help to grow management and
digital incentives because we want to
help small and medium-sized businesses
get the management
training they need and help them get the
digital technology they need to compete
in the future economy and so that to me
when you put it all together
are the actions of a government that
firmly believes in supporting business
both in the short term but also in the
long term
and the last thing i'd say because i i
think it's also important
we really want businesses to invest well
we know that
investment can help drive our recovery
and today i announced something called
the super deduction
which is a tax cut for business
investment the likes of which we haven't
ever seen before
in this country and that will really
support businesses to invest now over
the next two years
to help drive our recovery and i think
it will make a huge difference
next are we going to joel
hello there chancellor can you hear me
okay i can joel fire away
i want to pick up on corporation tax the
corporation tax
increase is enormous it's a six-point
jump overnight in two years time the
confederation of british industry
describes it as a worrying
signal this does feel like a gamble
doesn't it especially
now brexit is done you say you want more
businesses to invest in the uk
is there a danger that this will achieve
the opposite
well joel i think that the the cbi also
said lots of other positive comments
about the the budget
today which people can can read but you
talk about the corporation tax rate
again and you talk about international
competitiveness and the signal it sends
we will still have a lower corporation
tax rate
than any of our major g7 competitors
so america canada france germany italy
uh for example and so i think that puts
us in very good stead internationally
and if you broaden that group of large
economies out to another group called
the g20
were the 20 largest economies in the
world we would still have the fifth
lowest rate in that group
so i think on any measure it's still an
internationally competitive
rate that signals uh that britain is is
open for business and supportive
of business and as i was saying to
faisal the super deduction
the tax cut for business that we've put
in place over the next two years to
support the recovery
to drive up business investment in new
factories new machines
across the country that's an enormous
tax cut for business
i think it's the biggest business tax
cut that i think we've ever seen in
british history as far as we can
calculate
but i think that shows we're on the side
of business and we know they can help
play their part in the recovery but i
also think it's reasonable given the
amount of support that we've
given business given the the crisis we
face with our public finances
that it's reasonable to ask those
largest
most successful companies in two years
time to contribute
something back to help us rebuild i
think that's a reasonable and fair
approach
that will support us in the long term
but it's reasonable in the
in the long term as well
i think next are we going to ed
yes hello hi chancellor ed conway news
can you can you hear me
and behind me we've got a chart that
we've been looking at a lot
uh today at sky news showing you tax as
a percentage of gdp basically the tax
burden
uh in the uk and i suppose my question
is you're looking at this chart and
looking at how
high the tax burden is getting towards
the end of the forecast horizon
are you concerned about being the
chancellor with the highest
tax burden of any chance of going all
the way back to the 1960s
and roy jenkins does that concern you at
all
well ed i guess what the chart your
chart doesn't show is uh all the other
chancellors if any of them have had
pandemics to deal with uh you know we
haven't had a pandemic like this in over
100 years
and so i think that's remember that's
why we're having this conversation
that's the problem that we're grappling
with
and unsurprisingly you know when you've
had a shock like that
and then when you've had a response the
one and the likes of which we've done i
don't think any of those other
chancellors probably have ever had to do
as much fiscal support for
the country as i have had to i think
it's reasonable to expect that what we
have to do in response to all of those
things is going to be a bit different
to what's happened in the past but what
i would say is
you know what are we doing what are we
doing with those taxes what we're doing
is funding
strong public services people elected us
because we told them we were the party
of public services we were going to
invest in the nhs in schools
and we were also going to invest in
projects across the country to level up
opportunity
that's what we want to get on and
deliver during this parliament and we
also want to be responsible with the
public finances for the reasons i set
out
and it's because of those reasons that
i've take taken the two decisions i've
made today
and i do believe they are the right
decisions for the country
and for the economy
next we're going to helia
okay that's it
good afternoon chancellor the obr points
out
that in your calculations there's no
provision for
virus-related costs beyond next year
despite the fact that the government
acknowledges that there will be an
annual vaccination program there'll be
further costs
associated with test and trace as well
as of course the nhs
increased cost because of cancelled
operations and procedures
you've made a lot today about wanting to
be honest with people
do you think it's your is it your honest
judgment
today that the pandemic will cost
nothing from next year
well on public spending you're right to
differentiate between the
the general plans we have which i can go
through in a second and then also the
plans for coronavirus and it's right
think about those things differently
now obviously at this moment we don't
know exactly uh
the future path of what's going to
happen but what we do know is that this
year there's an enormous amount of call
for extra funding for chronovirus which
is why why today i announced
1.6 billion pounds of extra funding for
example
for the vaccination program to make sure
that we can get that
get that all the resources it needs to
happen as quickly as possible provide
for potential booster shots but also to
improve our preparedness
for future pandemics so some of the
things we're doing is to build that
capacity to react quickly
in the future um so i don't have a
crystal ball about about next year but
we are thinking
about the next 12 months and what's
required you talked about nhs backlog at
the spending review in november we
announced billions of pounds of extra
funding
for the nhs both for diagnostic
equipment to
upgrade some of the older diagnostic
equipment and to provide more ability
for the nhs to do elective surgery this
year to start catching up on some of the
backlog that we know exists
but to your broader question about
public services and public spending
the numbers that are set out today show
that there will be strong growth
strong investment in public services not
just over these two years but for the
remainder of the parliament
as well then next
i think catherine sampson yes thank you
chancellor
just your reaction please the two points
uh first of all scotland's finance
secretary claims you've not matched her
ambition
for supporting economic recovery and
jobs and she's especially disappointed
you didn't make that
uplift to universal credit and
permanence just your reaction to that
and secondly
your business minister suggested an
interview yesterday
when it came to an independence
referendum it was up to the scottish
people to decide when
and whether they want one do you agree
with him and is the treasury planning
some change of strategy here
well catherine you know i i genuinely
believe that i don't think people want
any of us be focusing on constitutional
questions at the moment i think what
people want is us to be focusing on our
response
to the pandemic making sure that we get
the vaccine rolled out
as quickly as we can into as many
people's arms as possible
and then with that with the prime
minister's roadmap
cautiously and safely reopen our economy
get our lives back to normal and try and
protect as many jobs as possible
and i think that's actually what people
want us to focus on
which is what we're getting on and doing
with regard to the universal credit
uplift
i announced today that we are extending
that for six months uh this was
something that we put in place
temporarily at the beginning of the
pandemic when we were in lockdown
and the six months extension means that
it will be in place
well beyond the end of this current
lockdown
and it only forms one part of our
response to helping those on low incomes
or those who are vulnerable
there's lots of other things we're doing
helping people with their council tax
bills
with their rental payments through
something called local housing allowance
but crucially the best way to help
people over time
is to give them the skills they need to
get great jobs or get better jobs
which is why we've increased the
national living wage next year
above inflation which means a 350 pound
pay rise for those on low incomes
and we're also with the prime minister's
lifetime skills guarantee for example
giving every adult the opportunity to go
and get a government-funded
qualification
at a good standard which will help them
increase their prospects of getting a
job or getting a new job
and they're doing lots of other things
to encourage companies to hire people
for example our kickstart scheme for
young people or indeed
the three thousand pounds that we're
paying companies to take on a new
apprentice
so there's lots of different ways to
help people the figures and the facts in
the document today show that those on
the lowest incomes
have been supported the most by all the
interventions that we've put in place
over the last 12 months so i'm proud of
that
that is this government acting to
protect those who really need our help
but as the economy reopens it's right
that we transition our support to
focusing on people
getting them into work getting them the
skills they need and that's what this
budget delivers
next i think we're going over to the
times and
philip aldrich phillip you there yes hi
chancellor
um on on corporation tax the
you you're undoing 10 years of
tax policy by raising corporation tax up
to 25
in 2023 uh and you're even reintroducing
a small business tax rate so
i just wondered um was the policy the
previous policy wrong
and and also what gives you confidence
that your tax rises are not going to
choke off the recovery
in 2023 there's still spare capacity
under the obr's forecasts right at the
end of the forecast
period so it looks like um there's more
to go for
in in terms of growth thanks phil i've
been on encore i think it's not right to
judge decisions that were made over the
last 10 years
uh by the fact that today we're dealing
with the results of a
hopefully once in a century pandemic
that we're grappling with the decisions
that were made in the past were right
for them
and we're making the right decisions for
now i think with corporation tax over
time
you know what's transpired as it might
not be the most effective way
to drive capital investment up which is
what we want to see because we want
businesses to invest
to create jobs and new machinery to
drive up productivity and
we think our super deduction uh
hopefully will do a better job of that
over the next two years
um and that and i think we'll see we'll
hopefully see the results
of that and then with with regard to
your second question
we need obviously to be sensitive about
the timing of this to make sure that we
do support the recovery in the short
term
the super deduction obviously does that
the corporation tax increase doesn't
come for two years
which is past the point that the obr
expect
our gdp to have recovered its pre-crisis
level uh which actually is is next year
in the second quarter of next year
the bank of england happened to think
that will happen a bit earlier than that
even
and your point on spare capacity you'll
know that that is the output gap which i
think is what you're referring to
is a notoriously difficult thing for
economists to estimate with any
precision
but even on the obr's forecast the bulk
of that gap is closed
over the next 12 to 18 months and then
what's left over the residual period is
i think 0.1 from memory but it i think i
think broadly we can
we can safely believe that the economy
will have recovered and that is a safe
time
for the increase to happen but in the
proportionate way
that it is not affecting small
businesses and remember
corporation tax is a tax on profits so
by definition it's only those companies
who are doing well making profits
that pay it so
next we're going over to the ft george
are you there hi george i am thank you
chancellor
um can i ask you a bit about your
flagship leveling up
program we were looking at your one
billion pound towns fund you've
announced today
by our reckoning 40 of the 45 towns on
the list
are represented by conservative mps
we're also looking at the leveling up
fund that you've announced and you've
come up with some priority
areas i noticed that your constituency
richmond shire
is in priority area one whereas places
like barnsley bolt over salford are in
priority
area two i just wonder if you give us
any reassurance that you're using
fair criteria to assess the eligibility
of these areas
whether this looks a little bit like
naked barrel politics
thanks george so the formula for the
uh the the grant payments for the new
fund to give them some capacity funding
to bid for projects
is based on an index of economic need uh
which is
transparently uh published i think
actually by mhclg
and based on a bunch of objective
measures so that will be there for
people
to have a look at and remember that's
only areas that have received
some capacity funding to bid no area is
excluded for bidding it's just that
those areas on the basis of this formula
might need a bit of extra help
so we're giving those local areas some
money to put their bid together to help
them
uh and and you know to your broader
point i think if you look at all the
things we're doing they're benefiting
people
in every corner of the country so we for
example announce the location of our
eight free ports in england
today you know they're spread in eight
english regions
uh in it from southampton to t side to
liverpool
you know across the country and all of
those areas are actually represented by
a mix of both
mps and local authorities because what
we're interested in is making sure that
wherever you grow up wherever you happen
to live that this government
is helping to provide opportunity for
you and creating jobs in your area
and i firmly believe that whether it's
the leveling up fund
or our free ports initiative or any
other things we're doing you know we are
delivering and making good on that
promise
next we're going to graham from the
daily mirror graham you there
i am hope you can hear me yes i can hi
good evening hello good afternoon um are
you chancellor are you prepared to
extend still further the cut-off date
for the
renewed support that you've announced
today if and while no one wants this the
timing for the roadmap
has to change and then secondly if i may
what do you say to those who have
labeled it
an insult that uh there's no pay rise
for
many thousands of public sector workers
who've been uh on the front line during
the
june pandemic there's been no pay rise
announced by you today
uh graeme to your first point what we've
done
very deliberately is extend
all of our support well beyond the end
of the road map which you know the prime
minister set out some dates in
in april march april may and then
finally june uh for example look at
furlough which is being extended all the
way sept
to september in line with many other
things
the reason we've taken that approach is
as i said in the in the house of commons
today
is because we want to make sure that
we've made allowance for even the most
cautious possible interpretation of the
road map of what might happen
um so we've done that in advance to
provide people with that
certainty uh up front so i think i think
we're well well protected on that and
that i think has been met broadly uh
well today
by stakeholders to your second point on
public sector pay
this was something that i addressed in
the spending review
back in november when we talked about
pay for the next year and
back then what i said which i'm happy to
to go over now is
if i when i was looking at all the
numbers what we saw was
in the private sector wages were falling
people were having their hours cut many
of them were furloughed
and sadly almost three-quarters of a
million people
in private sector had lost their jobs
and almost none of those things
had happened in the public sector so
given that
and given the obviously very difficult
fiscal situation
situation that we face that we've been
talking about you know i thought for
reasons of fairness
and also to try and protect those public
sector jobs
it was reasonable to take a more
targeted approach to public sector pay
for this next year
so what does that mean that means those
who work in the nhs
a million people it's about a quarter of
all people in the public sector
they will receive a pay rise next year
and we're all very grateful to them
for the fantastic work that they are
doing under difficult conditions
but for everyone else there will be a
pause on pay increases this year
but that means doesn't mean nothing it
means if your pay would normally have
progression built into it as many
contracts do
that will still happen and that's worth
about one percent
and then the extra protection we did for
those in the public sector was if you
earn less than about
24 and a half thousand pounds from
memory about the median
salary of someone in the uk your pay
will also go up by a fixed 250 pounds
or one percent and if you take all of
that together what that means is a
majority of people
in the public sector will see their pay
increase next year
so for the reasons i've set out i think
that is a fair and proportionate
approach
to public sector pay in the
circumstances that we we find ourselves
in
and lastly i think we are going over to
ben from the daily telegraph good
evening ben
can you hear me chancellor i can now
fantastic
two quick questions firstly can you rule
out an increase in the rate of capital
gains tax
this parliament and secondly there's
early data that suggests the cobit
vaccine
is having a real impact on the pandemic
a positive impact
quicker than the models suggested do you
think we should be open
to possibly pulling forward some of the
reopening road map dates
if the data says it's safe to do that
thanks ben well i i i always and people
probably tired of hearing me say this
that they've been watching me on the
telly in the recent week but i i
obviously can't comment on uh
fiscal policy other than on the ones
that we're talking about in the budget
so i can't answer your your first
question but i think we've made the
decisions we've made on tax and as
as we said in our manifesto we didn't
want to raise the rates of
income tax national insurance and vat
and we have stuck by that
uh because that is important to me uh to
do that
and with regard to your second uh
question um
the prime minister when he sent out the
road map said that what we were trying
to do
was for it to be cautious but
irreversible and and that's the right
approach
and the dates that we set out were
always the earliest of dates
we are making and that's the way they
will remain
but it's a good note for us to finish on
and i think it just to say
incredible congratulations and thanks to
everyone involved
with the vaccine rollout it's been
something that all of us in the country
i think can feel
hugely proud of from the team that
developed the vaccine
in oxford whether it's professor sarah
gilbert and her team you know all the
way to the volunteers who are now
helping get it into people's arms
and shepherding them through all our
vaccine centers an unbelievable rate
faster than almost any other country in
the world
you know what a success story what a
thing for us to be so proud of
and a great advert of what we can be in
the future
we can be as i talked about in the
speech a scientific superpower
where we're developing new medicines new
therapeutics
we can create new companies out of that
create new jobs and spread that
employment around the country
and save people's lives in the process
you know i think it's shown us what
we're capable of a country
and we want to harness that spirit as we
look forward and build
a brighter future for the country as we
emerge from this pandemic
and i'm very confident that today's
budget sets us on the road to doing
exactly that
thank you ben and thank you very much
everyone good evening
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news